Hi there.
This is the Romans.
And welcome back.
Finally, we are ready to dabble with databases and see how we can make our Java programs interact with
databases.
We all know how ubiquitous databases are.
Except for small websites which sell some static HTML content like the blogging websites.
Almost all businesses and websites, both small and large, make use of databases and some of the other
form in order to store their data.
Now in our project, we were using text files to store our data and that is not good as we will soon
learn in this lecture.
So we'll be moving everything into our database and we will be using my SQL database.
And in the process, we will also learn about database design, which is very important.
And we will look at several SQL queries, and we will also look at the GBK API, which is part of the
Java API, and it helps then interacting with the database.
That is, it will help our Java programs to interact with databases.
So we will refactor our project code in order to read data from the database and also to write data
back into database.
So it's going to be a very interesting chapter.
And for all practical reasons, it brings you a step closer to being a professional Java engineer.
Because every company out there uses a database in some or the other form, and in this lecture we'll
mainly look at how stating Java objects would be represented within a database.
And we will also explore the agenda for the chapter.
Now when we talk about database, we essentially mean a DB CMS, which is short for database management
system.
And the DB CMS is simply a software which is an storing and retrieval of data.
On my SQL is a DMS.
Now there are different types of PBMs.
And one of the most commonly used types is a relational database management system, or PBMs and short
databases like my SQL Oracle database.
Microsoft SQL Server are some examples of PBMs.
And more recently, another type of VMs called NoSQL databases have become very popular, and I'm sure
you must have heard of them.
And they are especially useful when we are dealing with massive amounts of data, which is also growing
very rapidly.
In other words, scalability is the key goal here.
That is, we need to be able to scale as more and more data is getting added.
MongoDB, Cassandra and Redis are a few examples of NoSQL databases.
Not that IBM's are also proven to handle large amounts of data and they also serve as backend for some
really fast websites.
But for certain types of scalability requirements, no obscure databases are preferable.
And in this section we are going to deal with PBMs.
And like I mentioned earlier, it would be my SQL database.
And there are also other types of specialized VMs for handling data such as time series data, but things
like weather and stock prices are tracked at different time instances, and there are also databases
to handle only XML documents.
However, these two types of VMs are definitely the most widely used.
Now coming to albums.
They have been popular since the 1970s and the database management systems is also a very active research
area within computer science.
Edgar Cord is an English computer scientist from IBM who invented the relational data model, which
is the underlying data model on which relational database management systems are based on.
So this serves as the underlying theoretical framework.
And for this seminal work, he was given the ACM Turing Award in 1981.
In case you're not familiar with what Turing Award is, it is considered equivalent to a Nobel Prize
within the field of computer science.
Now, before Codd invented relational model, there were also other models like hierarchical and network
model.
But relational data model is what has made database systems to be widely adopted in the industry.
So basically it revolutionized the database field itself.
And here are a few important benefits of using an BMS.
First, we have a language for interacting with the database, and it is a very widely known SQL which
stands for Structured Query Language.
And it is also often pronounced as SQL and it is a standard from ISO in a relational database.
Data is stored in something called tables, and SQL is used for creating tables, inserting data into
tables, deleting data, retrieving and also updating data in the tables.
So there are some specific queries for that and we will look at many of those queries.
A second benefit is that database supports certain data structures for accessing data in a very efficient
way.
So there are some data sources for that.
And third is integrity constraints, which are essential for storing only good data.
For instance, we might want to avoid storing duplicate data, and for that we can enforce certain integrity
constraints.
So if we try to insert duplicate data, then the database would reject that particular instance of data.
Another important benefit is concurrency.
Just like in the case of Java, we can also have same data being accessed via multiple threads and we
need to ensure that data is not corrupted.
Databases also use locking mechanisms, just like in the case of programming languages in order to protect
data.
So these are some of the important benefits.
And there are also many more benefits in using a database.
Now, if you use only files like the way we did in our project, then we will not have any of these
benefits.
So soon we will refactor our project in order to use a database.
Now we know that Java is an object oriented programming language and it is all about objects and objects
have state and this state has to be persisted to a database.
So let's see how that mapping looks like.
In our three year project, we had users and each user is an instance such as this one, which has some
state here.
One is the ID, John is the name and gender is male.
Now within the database, this will get stored in a corresponding table.
We can have the same name user for the table and we would have a row of data representing state of a
particular object.
So information about John is stored in this way and we have ID stored in the first column name in the
second column and gender in the third column.
Next we can have another user object and estate would be stored as a separate row in the user table.
Now here the ID column should by convention hold only unique values, so they help in uniquely identifying
the content they represent.
So they help in uniquely identifying a particular row, in this case, a user role by convention.
Such a column is also named as ID and by convention it would also be the first column in the table.
And that is an example of an integrity constraint that was mentioned earlier.
And an SQL terminology.
Such an ID field is referred to as primary key.
So it is the key that identifies some data, just like the keys that we have in hash tables.
Similarly, we can have a book object such as this one.
And this book object would correspond to a row in a different table called book in our database.
Not that the ID values are identical in both user and book tables, and that is perfectly fine as these
both tables are independent from each other.
Ah.
Now I need to hear my bookmark this particular book item and we can have a user book class representing
this relation.
And hence we have another object.
And in our database, this would be represented by another table and it would look something like this
here.
The second and third column is what identifies the relationship between user and book that the user
has bookmarked a particular book.
Second column is named as user underscore ID and it corresponds to the ID and the user table.
That's the reason we have ID of Anita, which is to under user underscore ID column.
Similarly, third column book underscore ID corresponds to the ID field in the book table.
So book underscore ID has the value one.
So that is how Anita Bookmarking a book is represented in the database.
On here user underscore ID and underscore ID are referred to as foreign keys as they can identify rows
and user and book tables.
That is a user underscore ID value can identify a related row in the user table and same applies to
book underscore ID.
Since a key is referencing the ID field in another table, it would always be a valid value.
For instance, if we assume that the user table has only these two rows with the ID values one and two,
then the user underscore ID in user underscore book table can also have only one of these two values.
So it cannot have a value like three which is not present in the user table.
I know that the ID field in the table user underscore book would be the primary key.
And finally, just note that you can also have a foreign key in a table referencing a primary key in
the same table to.
So it need not be a separate table like in this case, although the scenario is not that common, but
it is definitely not a rare thing to encounter.
Now let's look at what database schema is.
So we have these two user objects from the previous slide.
And we know that a user class defines them.
That is, a user class is like a blueprint.
Now similarly in the database, we would have the user table itself that corresponds to the user class
and sometimes more formally, they refer to such a table as a relation schema or sometimes entity two
and a bunch of relation schemas together form a database schema.
On this user table would have similar fields like ID name and gender, and they also have data types
associated with them, just like in the case of our Java class.
So you can notice that in the Java class type of ID is long while in the database we are using big end.
Similarly for name, it is string in the class while it is worker in the database.
Worker means variable length strings.
So you can store variable length strings in such a field.
And big end and worker are data types that are specific to my SQL database.
And we would have similar, if not the same names in other databases like Oracle and SQL Server.
So well.
A school is a standard.
These different vendors like my school and Oracle might implement it slightly differently so they can
be seen as slightly different dialects.
Also like in the case of data types in Java, data types and databases also have a range of values that
they support.
So that's very obvious.
So just like a class has instances, a relation schema also has instances in the form of records or
rules.
In more formal terms, we can refer to such a table with data as a relation.
And we can also have columns or files on each row in the table is also sometimes formally referred to
as a table, although record or row is more commonly used.
So just wanted you to take a note of those formal terms.
But I think we can simply stick to terms like table, column or field and rows or records.
So they don't have a high level understanding of how data is represented within an VMs.
And now let's take a quick look at the agenda for this chapter.
Next, I will briefly give instructions on installing my SQL.
And after that, we will briefly look at database design.
And for that, we will look at something called database normalization.
It's very important.
And we'll also see how the database for our project would look like.
And we will do that in a tool called My SQL Workbench.
Next we will create a database for our project within our MySQL instance and we will create some tables
and also populate those tables with some data.
Then we will look at the GPC API briefly and we will see how we can interact with that database from
our Java programs.
And here we be refactoring our project code in order to read data from database and write data back
into database.
So we will not be using text files anymore.
And we will also focus a bit on performance, which is where we will look at something called connection
polling.
And the last thing I would call it as a rest of the stuff as we will be gradually adding the remaining
content.
And we will be looking at things like database indexing and other important types of SQL queries that
we commonly encounter.
But please note that our focus is mainly on learning about how to interact with the database in a clean
and efficient way.
And of course, we will also look at database design.
However, we will not be exploring SQL or MySQL at an in-depth level as they are outside the scope of
this course.
And you would have to work on it separately.
But this section will give you the foundations that you'll need in order to explore further and dig
deeper in those areas.
And for that, I would also recommend these books.
On the left is the database management systems by Ramakrishnan and Johannes Gerlach.
I read most parts of this book while I was a student long time back, and it is one of the best books
that I have ever read and it will give you a very good understanding of IBM's and the algorithms that
IBM's would employ.
Second book is dedicated to my school and it also seems to be good and you can take a look at it.
And if I come across any other good resources, I will definitely add them in the resources section
of this particular lecture.
So that's about it.
And this is the on signing off for now.
Thank you.